NAME
  tsql - utility to test FreeTDS connections and queries
SYNOPSIS
  tsql 	{ -S servername [-I interface] | -H hostname [-L] [-p port] } 
 	[-D dbname] [-U username [-P password]] [-o options]
	
  tsql	-C

DESCRIPTION

tsql is a FreeTDS diagnostic tool. It uses the TDS protocol to connect to a 
Sybase or Microsoft SQL Server, and lets the user issue queries. tsql does
not use the FreeTDS client libraries. Instead, it uses only the lowest level
library, libtds, to test the protocol implementation. 

tsql can be run in two ways, one which uses the freetds.conf and one which
connects directly using the server's hostname and port. 

The -H and -p parameters are provided to verify a server is listening on 
the named host and port. These parameters override any configuration files
and environment variables. 

The -S parameter can be used to test the local configuration. FreeTDS will use
freetds.conf (or equivalent) and environment variables in the normal way to
determine the server's IP address and port. You can use -I to specify a
filename, overriding FreeTDS's configuration file search algorithm. 

OPTIONS

	-S servername  database server to which to connect.

	-D dbname  database to use.

	-I interface  freetds.conf or interfaces file describing servername.

	-H hostname  DNS hostname of the server.

	-p port  port at which SQL Server is listening.

	-U username  database login name. If username is not provided, a domain
	login is attempted for TDS 7+ connections.

	-P password  database password.
	
	-L  list Microsoft server instances (with -H).

	-C  print some of the compile-time configuration parameters.  

	-o options  apply the options specified to every command.
		f      No footer       [result count]
		h      No header       [titles]
		t      Print time
		v      Print version
		q      Quiet

NOTES

If you can connect with "tsql -S servername", your basic FreeTDS installation
is working. 

Typing "exit", "quit", or "bye" (or ^D) exits tsql. 

Typing "version" displays the TDS protocol version. 

Command batches may be separated with "go" or "GO". If "GO", the version
string is reported before executing the batch. 

After prompting for the password (if not provided with -P), tsql will attempt
to connect to the remote server. tsql displays a counter indicating the number
of seconds elapsed during the connection attempt. Typically, tsql immediately
responds with a '1>' prompt. If you see the counter (1, 2, 3, ...), most likely
tsql is unable to connect to the indicated server.

tsql is not a replacement for a complete isql such as sqsh (www.sqsh.org). 
If you have suggestions for ways to make tsql more useful as a diagnostic tool,
please post them to the FreeTDS mailing list for consideration. 

HISTORY

tsql first appeared in FreeTDS 0.60.

AUTHORS

The tsql utility was written by Brian Bruns.

BUGS

Several, to be sure, now that it's documented. :)
